'We're at risk of financial collapse': Ken Clarke's warning for
Western economies

By JAMES CHAPMAN and JAMES SLACK Last updated at 8:16 AM on
15th October 2010

The West is in 'grave danger of financial collapse', Kenneth
Clarke warned last night.  We face 'quite the most
dramatic'spending cuts in 'living memory', the former
chancellor added as the Coalition prepares to unveil plans to
rein in the unprecedented budget deficit left by Labour.  'I
actually am one of those who believes, with a grave danger of
financial collapse, we're not out of the woods in the Western
world yet,'he said in the extraordinary address.  'There is an
extremely serious financial crisis.'

His remarks appeared to contradict the Prime Minister, who
insisted days ago that the Coalition's early decisions have
put Britain 'out of the danger zone'.

Mr Clarke said the UK had 'rescued ourselves at the moment',
but added: 'If we fail to deliver with the [cuts] programme
we're going to set out, we'll be back there all too soon.'

Speaking ahead of next week's comprehensive spending review,
which will see most Government departments'budgets cut by 25
per cent over four years, the Justice Secretary said: 'These
are difficult circumstances.'

In unscripted remarks to a conference of prison governors, Mr
Clarke said the review would be 'quite the most dramatic in
living memory'.

That also undermined attempts by Mr Cameron and Liberal
Democrat Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg to assure voters
that Â£83billion cuts will not mean an end to life as we know
it.

Both have pointed out that by the time of the next election in
2015, government spending will simply have been reduced to the
same level as in 2006.

But Mr Clarke insisted: 'There's no one alive who remembers a
crisis of this kind. It is not the usual public spending
squeeze.'  Blaming the last government for the financial
crisis, he added that he had never 'hidden my disapproval of a
state that spends the equivalent of half of the GDP'.

'The current levels of spending are simply unsustainable and
it would be irresponsible for the Government not to get to
grips with it,'he added.

David Cameron met with the Governor of California Arnold
Schwarzenegger earlier this week and joked the former actor
would help 'terminate' the budget deficit Mr Clarke's remarks
were made to the Prison Governors'Association, where he warned
there would be no extra money available to drive through the
Government's radical jail reforms.

He wants prisons to encourage inmates to work a 40-hour week,
in return for the minimum wage. Most of the cash would go to
victim groups, the Prison Service to pay for bed and board and
the convicts' families.
 
Mr Clarke said: 'I want to be clear, so far as all these reforms go, we don't have any money.'
It is the second time in as many weeks that he has delivered a
downbeat economic message.

On the eve of the Tory Party conference, he suggested global
shocks could yet mean Britain faces a 'double-dip'recession.

A report today concludes that warnings of savage reductions in
the size of the state after next week's review are overblown.
 
It describes Chancellor George Osborne's cuts as 'a shower, not a
hurricane'.

Economist Tim Morgan, of brokers Tullett Prebon, in a report
for the right-wing Centre for Policy Studies think tank,
acknowledges that the spending cuts 'will hurt'and jobs will
be lost.

But he insists the cuts are 'both modest and essential'.

The alternatives would be higher borrowing, which could drive
interest rates up to dangerous levels; more printing of money,
which would risk a surge in inflation in the long run; or
higher taxes, which would damage competitiveness, he said.

Government budgets are bloated after a decade of
'irresponsible excess' under Labour, he added.


