Kenneth Clarke: economies still in grave danger of collapse

Western economies remain in grave danger of financial
collapseÂ¡ and next week's spending review is vital if Britain
is to avoid falling victim to another downturn, Kenneth
Clarke, the Justice Secretary, has said.

By Andrew Porter, Political Editor Published: 6:00AM BST 15
Oct 2010

Mr Clarke's stark warning that the country faces a 'dramatic'
12 months raises the stakes ahead of the review. It also
appears at odds with recent comments by David Cameron, who
suggested that Britain was now out of the 'danger zone'.

Mr Clarke, a former chancellor, said the spending review was
'quite the most dramatic in living memory' and added: 'There's
no one alive who remembers a crisis of this kind.

'I actually am one of those who believes, with a grave danger
of financial collapse, we're not out of the woods in the
Western world yet.

'There is an extremely serious financial crisis.'

He said that the Coalition had 'rescued' Britain from 'being
bracketed with the weaker brethren with doubts about our
credit rating and the costs of our borrowing'.

But he added: 'If we fail to deliver with the spending
programme we're going to set out, we'll be back there all too
soon. So these are quite dramatic changes in spending which we
will hear about next week. I would brace yourself for quite a
lot of change, because these are difficult circumstances.'

The Prime Minister used a Downing Street press conference
earlier this week to warn of dangers to Britain's recovery
from abroad, but in an interview with The Daily Telegraph
three weeks ago he suggested that the worst was over.

He said: 'The argument for rapid action is that it took
Britain out of the danger zone. We used to be lumped together
with Spain and Greece, we are not any more, we are out of that
danger zone.'

Last week Mr Clarke irritated Downing Street by warning of the
risk of a double-dip recession and saying that he was not
'sunnily optimistic' about the prospects for Western
economies.

Mr Cameron reacted to those comments, made during the
Conservative conference, by pointing out that the Office for
Budget Responsibility and CBI were both predicting the British
economy would continue to grow.

George Osborne faces a frenetic weekend as he finalises the
spending review, to be announced next Wednesday, which will
see budgets in some Whitehall departments cut by as much as 40
per cent. The remaining Cabinet ministers who have yet to
settle their budgets with the Chancellor are expected to do so
by Friday.
